---
kind:        article
title:       Coral 0.5.1 Released
project:     coral
version:     0.5.1
tags:        [release, coral]
created_at:  2011/01/10
excerpt:     Maintenance release with bug fixes and improved SDK usability.
---

This is a maintenance release. It fixes bugs and some SDK usability issues found in the original release.

## Changes since v0.5.0

- Updated Lua to version 5.2 alpha.
- Updated mapping rules: output array parameters are now passed by reference instead of pointers, and cannot be null.
- The CMake target 'docs' now also compiles the general documentation (requires nanoc).
- Improvements for the API documentation (cosmetic changes, syntax highlighting for Lua code, etc.)
- Many small bug fixes, specially on Windows.
- Fixed handling of Windows-style (CRLF) line-endings in CSL files.
- `RelWithDebInfo` builds are now considered 'release' builds, instead of 'debug'.
- Fix for a segfault related to lazy-loading a service from an invalid module.
- New template function `co::Any::createComplexValue<T>()`.
- Fixed bugs in `co::Any`'s temporary objects API.
- Fixed potential (although unconfirmed) uninitialized memory problems in the `co::Any` constructors, detected by valgrind when running with optimizations.
- Improved SDK packaging:
	- Universal support for simultaneous Debug/Release installs of the SDK in the same `CORAL_ROOT`.
	- A safe `CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX` is now enforced on all platforms.
	- The Windows Debug package now includes PDB files.
	- Renamed the launcher executable from `coral` to `launcher` to solve PDB name clashes on Windows.
	- The core library now gets a '_debug' suffix when built in debug mode.
	- The `coral` and `coralc` executables are now simple C++ programs (instead of shell scripts).
	- It is now possible to request the `coral` executable to start the framework in either Debug or Release mode via the command-line option '--mode'.
