---
kind:        article
title:       Coral 0.7 Released
project:     coral
version:     0.7.0
tags:        [release, coral]
created_at:  2011/11/28
excerpt:     Coral 0.7 introduces annotations, dynamic types, more powerful native classes,
             a logging API and lots of improvements.
---

Coral 0.7 introduces major new features and lots of improvements.

## Changes since v0.6.x

### New Features
- **Annotations**: types and members can be decorated with metadata in CSL using syntax similar to Java annotations.
	- Example: `@my.Annotation( "str value", someBoolField = true, tau = 2 * 3.14159 )`
	- Currently the CSL parser supports boolean, scalar and string-literal values.
	- Elements decorated with stateless annotations automatically share the same annotation instance.
	- New types of annotations can be defined by implementing a component that provides an annotation service.
	- The "CSL Flags" in `co/Coral.h` can be used to toggle the loading of annotations, documentation and C++ blocks.
	- Added a CLI option to the Coral Launcher to specify the CSL flags at launch time.
- Support for **dynamic types** through a special kind of annotation.
	- A type is _dynamic_ if it has an annotation that implements `co.IDynamicTypeProvider`.
	- A dynamic type is not statically-compiled as part of a module, and does not have a Coral-generated reflector.
	- The type's reflector must be provided at run-time by its dynamic-type annotation.
	- Example: CSL components can be implemented in Lua if annotated with the `@lua.Scripted` annotation.
- More powerful **native classes** based on C++ blocks and annotations.
	- Instead of being defined in terms of a C++ header and a type name, which proved to be a restrictive approach, native classes are now freely declared using _C++ blocks_ in CSL.
	- C++ blocks are mapped from CSL to _global scope_ in the native class's header file. The only rule is that the code must declare a C++ type with the same fully-qualified name as the native class.
	- When added to a native class, the CSL annotation `@co.Include( "header/name.h" )` instructs the Coral Compiler to include the specified C++ header when generating code that uses the native class.
	- Recommended usage:
		- Declare _simple types_ directly in the C++ block.
		- For complex types, include only a _forward declaration_ in the C++ block, then use the `@co.Include` annotation to indicate where the full declaration is located.
- Simple yet powerful **Logging API**, with design inspired by Google's Log library ([see the documentation](http://doc.libcoral.org/0.7/api/group__log.html#details)).

### Dropped Features
- The _debug events_ API was dropped in favor of the new, much superior _Logging API_.

### General Improvements
- Improved the CSL parsing backend.
	- Switched parser generators, from ANTLR to Flex/Bison. The ANLR3c runtime was not well maintained, and  Flex/Bison turned out to be a much simpler solution, aside from being both faster and lighter. This also means Coral is purely licensed under MIT now (ANTLR3c was under BSD).
	- Added columns to error locations.
	- Slightly improved error messages in the parser.
- Simplified the type creation API by moving "type transactions" a bit to the background.
	- Now `co.ITypeTransaction` is provided as a reusable singleton by the type manager.
		- In C++: `co::getSystem()->getTypes()->getTransaction()`;
		- In Lua: `co.system.types.transaction`.
	- Users no longer need to specify a `co.ITypeTransaction` to create a type builder. However, they still need to manage commits/rollbacks through the global type transaction.
- Field `size` in `IReflector` now always returns `sizeof(co::RefPtr)` for interface reflectors, indicating the size of a service reference. Previously, it returned a useless value.
- Many refactorings, code cleanups and new tests.

### Coral Library (libcoral)
- New interface `co.IAnnotation` for defining annotation types.
- Types and members can now have annotations (both `co.IType` and `co.IMember` extend `co.IAnnotated`).
- Documentation and C++ blocks have been refactored as annotations, instead of built-in data structures.
- New interface `co.IDynamicTypeProvider`, which extends `co.IAnnotation`, for implementing dynamic type providers.
- Fixed a bug related to casting a null `co::Any` to a primitive value.
- Many general improvements to the type traits code.
- Operator `co::typeOf<T>` is no longer overloaded for every type.
- Renamed method `co::IObject::getService( co::IPort* )` to `getServiceAt` to avoid overloading virtual methods.
- Safer coercions from const containers to `co::Range`.
- The coercion from `co::RefVector<T>` to `co::Range<T*>` has been forbidden (must be `co::Range<T* const>`).
- Header `co/Uuid.h` now only forward declares `co::Uuid`. For the full type, include `co/reserved/Uuid.h`.
- The LLVM-GCC and Clang compilers are now properly detected in `co/Platform.h`.
- Removed method `co::ITypeBuilder::defineNativeClass()`.
- Renamed utility function `co::findModuleFile()` to `co::findFile()`.

### Coral Compiler (coralc)
- Automatic detection and re-generation of incompatible code generated by different compiler versions.
- Component templates are now generated with member variables and working getters and setters.
	- Now plain data components can be used straight out of the Coral Compiler, without any change.
- The Coral Compiler now always generates a special `__AllInOne.cpp` file that includes all generated module sources. This file can be used to compile a module when listing each generated file would be too much of a burden.
- New approach to handle duplicate CSLs in the Coral path: now, when generating a module, the compiler limits itself to the first dir in the path that contains CSL files for such module, ignoring all other dirs. This approach solves all problems and is very simple to grasp. To make sure a certain dir is used when generating a module, list it first using `-p`.
- Dropped option `--ignoredupes`, since it has become the default/only behavior.
- New option `--list` for printing the list of files that would be generated for a module, without generating anything.
- The compiler's front end is now a Lua component (`co.compile.Compiler`) instead of a script (`co.compile.cli`).

### Coral Launcher (coral)
- New option `--csl` for toggling CSL features. By default, annotations are _on_, while documentation/C++ blocks are _off_.

### Lua Module (modules/lua)
- Updated to Lua 5.2 release candidate 2.
- Components defined in CSL can now be implemented in Lua. For this:
	1. Annotate the component with `@lua.Scripted( "script.name" )`, indicating the script that implements it.
	2. In the script, call `co.Component()` with the _type name_, instead of a component-description table.
- Lua components can be called directly by the Coral Launcher as long as they are defined in CSL.
- Added function `co.getException()` for extracting the type and message of a Coral exception caught from Lua.
- Moved all Coral-provided reusable Lua modules (i.e. `cmdline`, `path` and `printVar`) into the `lua` namespace, in order to make clear which Coral module provides them.
- Added functions `join`, `split` and `splitExt` to Lua module `lua.path`.
- Renamed function `co.findModuleFile()` to `co.findFile()`.

### CMake Package (FindCoral.cmake)
- New macro `CORAL_ADD_TEST( callee args )` for defining tests that use the _Coral Launcher_ to invoke a _Coral component_ passing along a list of arguments.
- Better diagnostic messages for Coral Compiler errors caught from CMake.
- Revamped all CMake macros to work properly with nested modules.
	- `CORAL_DEFAULT_TARGET_PROPERTIES( target )` is now `CORAL_TARGET( target )`.
	- `CORAL_MODULE_TARGET_PROPERTIES( target )` is now `CORAL_MODULE_TARGET( module target )`.

### Platform Specific
- Added support for LLVM Clang 3.0, which is shipped as the default compiler in Xcode 4.2.
- Dropped support for compilers older than Visual Studio 2010 / GCC 4.3. Starting this release, Coral requires minimal compiler support for C++11 (i.e. `static_assert` and TR1).
	- Support for older compilers can be resumed in the future, if it proves to be a must.
- Coral now builds with [GCC visibility attributes](http://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/Visibility) in all GCC-compatible compilers.
	- Flag `-fvisibility=hidden` is added by default when using GCC.
	- Now only the necessary symbols are exported when building a DSO.
	- This should cut DSO sizes by ~10% and significantly reduce module loading times.
